the term algae and turf grass management
refers to a symptom and also a group of
organisms for this video and the
Associated references when we refer to
algae we are referring to the members of
the cyanobacteria these organisms are
ancient and were the first organisms to
have developed photosynthesis their
fossils are the oldest known dating back
to 3.5 billion years humans have only
been around for 200,000 years
the cyanobacteria must have devised some
clever ways to compete and survive most
plant pathologists do not consider
cyanobacteria to be primary plant
pathogens organisms that are capable of
turning otherwise healthy plants into
sickly chlorotic and declining spots and
bare patches at Pace turf we consider
signing bacteria to be primary plant
pathogens similar to other organisms
such as the fairy ring fungi that damage
plants just by their presence the fairy
ring fungi and algae pathogens are
unlike more advanced plant pathogens
such as the rust fungi that have a very
close genetic interaction with their
host plants we speculate that the
cyanobacteria damage plants by producing
antibiotics that attack components of
the plants photosystem 2 the exact same
target that the herbicides atrazine and
dye Iran inhibit the cyanobacteria are
known to produce these antibiotics and
the antibiotics have been found to
inhibit photosystem 2 when extracted
from the cyanobacteria and applied to
plants the sign of bacteria can be
imagined as tiny biological herbicide
production machines normally these
antibiotics are targeted at other
cyanobacteria to provide a competitive
advantage the turf plants are not the
target the turf plants are simply a
substrate that the cyanobacteria use to
control their access to sunlight they
move up the leaves in the dark in search
of light and down the leaves during the
day when the sunlight is too intense for
diagnostic purposes we place samples in
a dark place overnight the cyanobacteria
move up the plant in search of light and
the trichomes accumulate at the leaf tip
in this photo we see that the trichomes
are trapped in a water droplet at the
leaf tip in the same way that we
observed free living nematodes
trapped in Dew droplets in a previous
video once the trichomes move up the
water droplet they cannot get out the
leaf will be exposed to any antibiotics
or herbicides that are produced by the
cyanobacteria the rest of this video
will illustrate the movement of the
cyanobacteria using a compound
microscope we have clocked the speed of
trichomes at 0.25 inches per hour but
some others have measured trichomes at
speeds of 1.2 inches per hour here's a
sample incubated overnight and you can
see the dark green trichomes starting to
crawl up the plant and some trichomes
further down on the thatch surface let's
take this leaf in take a look at it
under the compounds go here the
trichomes are coming off the leaf in the
upper right hand corner and there's a
try cone moving along the surface of the
slide let me speed up the motion so that
you can see the strike thumb moving a
little bit more rapidly now after this
trichome gets out of the view we're
gonna have another one running across
diagonally across the screen here you
can see it moving along and it's a
pretty long one so it takes a minute for
it to get entirely across the field of
view
there it goes then here's a couple of
trichomes moving at normal speed I'm
gonna speed it up in a second and we're
gonna watch these two pass each other
going in opposite directions and if you
watch the trichome on the right you'll
see an area where it's about to divide
which is where it separates just coming
on the screen now and then we'll also
see it change directions and go back the
other way so they can move either
forward or backward algae cyanobacteria
whatever you call the disease caused by
these primitive organisms you have to
appreciate the tenacity of these
organisms and their creativity and
production of photosystem 2 herbicides
for the past 3.5 billion years
refer to the links associated with this
video for more information on the
cyanobacteria